Add agent tooling: linter rule scaffold, validate:pr, and skill (#4469)
Azure/typespec-azure: website/src/content/docs/docs/howtos/contributing/when-to-write-a-linting-rule.md

addressed with a hybrid approach.

## Core Principle

> Prefer deterministic linting when the guideline can be expressed as a stable, reproducible
> check with high confidence and actionable diagnostics. Prefer AI when the guideline requires
> semantic judgment, domain intent, content generation, or evaluation of qualitative adequacy.
> Use hybrid approaches when deterministic rules can identify objective gaps and AI can help
> interpret, prioritize, or remediate them.

The decision to create a linting rule hinges primarily on **determinism of detection** — can you
reliably identify violations with low false positives? Whether the _resolution_ requires judgment
is a separate question that determines whether the rule is standalone or hybrid, not whether it
should exist.

## How Linter Diagnostics Work

All linter rules emit diagnostics with **warning** severity. This is important to understand:

- **Warnings** are suppressible — authors can add a suppression comment with justification
- **Unsuppressed warnings block CI** — the compiler treats unsuppressed diagnostics as errors
  during validation

> - **Errors** (non-linter) indicate inconsistent or uncompilable code and are _never_ suppressible

Author: ```suggestion
- **Errors** (non-linter) indicate inconsistent code or code that will not compile and are _never_ suppressible
```

Linter rules are never classed as errors because they enforce design guidelines, not language
correctness. The suppression mechanism exists precisely because even high-confidence rules
occasionally have legitimate exceptions that require human judgment.

## The Two Axes of Decision

When evaluating whether a guideline should become a linting rule, consider two independent
questions:

1. **Can violations be detected deterministically with high fidelity?** (detection axis)
2. **Can violations be resolved without contextual judgment?** (resolution axis)

These combine into three categories:

| Detection                          | Resolution                 | Approach                                                |
| ---------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- |
| Deterministic, low false positives | Unambiguous or few options | **Standalone linting rule** — detects and may offer fix |
| Deterministic, low false positives | Requires judgment/context  | **Hybrid** — rule detects, AI assists resolution        |

> | Requires semantic judgment         | Requires judgment/context  | **Defer to AI tooling**                                 |

Author: There is logically a fourth entry in this table, 'Requires Semantic Judgment' for Detection and 'Unambiguous or few options' for resolution  this should also be deferred to ai tooling

| **Missing documentation** | `@doc` decorator absent      | Generates appropriate text             |
| **Naming violation**      | Suffix/prefix/casing wrong   | Suggests contextually appropriate name |
| **Missing pagination**    | List operation lacks paging  | Helps structure the paging model       |
| **Overly broad type**     | `Record<unknown>` used       | Suggests appropriate typed alternative |

**Why the rule still matters in hybrid cases:**

- It provides a structured, reliable signal that AI tools can consume
- It ensures the issue is never silently ignored (unsuppressed warnings block CI)
- It gives instant in-editor feedback even when AI tools aren't active
- It makes the guideline auditable — you can count violations, track suppressions, measure
  compliance

## Anti-Patterns to Avoid

### ❌ Skipping a rule because the fix is hard

If detection is reliable, create the rule even if the fix requires judgment. The hybrid pattern
exists for exactly this case. A diagnostic that says "this model uses `Record<unknown>`, which
limits SDK usability" is valuable even without an auto-fix.

### ❌ Rules whose easiest fix is meaningless mechanical compliance

> If the rule incentivizes authors to add useless placeholders (e.g., `@doc("The Foo property")`)

Author: Need to add the word 'incentivizes' to the cspell dictionary

---
title: When to Write a Linting Rule vs. Defer to AI Tooling
---

> This guidance helps authors decide whether a given Azure API design guideline should be

Reviewer: can you also make clear what the diff between errors, linting rules, and best practice linting rules are?
